---
title: Traces
---

Dgraph is integrated with [OpenCensus](https://opencensus.io/zpages/) to collect
distributed traces from the Dgraph cluster.

Trace data is always collected within Dgraph. You can adjust the trace sampling
rate for Dgraph queries using the `--trace`
[superflag's](./deploy/cli-command-reference) `ratio` option when running Dgraph
Alpha nodes. By default, `--trace ratio` is set to 0.01 to trace 1% of queries.

## Examining traces with zPages

The most basic way to view traces is with the integrated trace pages.

OpenCensus's [zPages](https://opencensus.io/zpages/) are accessible via the Zero
or Alpha HTTP port at `/z/tracez`.

## Examining traces with Jaeger

Jaeger collects distributed traces and provides a UI to view and query traces
across different services. This provides the necessary observability to
understand what's happening in the system.

Dgraph can be configured to send traces directly to a Jaeger collector with the
`trace` superflag's `jaeger` option. For example, if the Jaeger collector is
running on `http://localhost:14268`, then pass this option to the Dgraph Zero
and Dgraph Alpha instances as `--trace jaeger=http://localhost:14268`.

See
[Jaeger's Getting Started docs](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/getting-started/)
to get up and running with Jaeger.

### Setting up multiple Dgraph clusters with Jaeger

Jaeger allows you to examine traces from multiple Dgraph clusters. To do this,
use the `--collector.tags` on a Jaeger collector to set custom trace tags. For
example, run one collector with `--collector.tags env=qa` and then another
collector with `--collector.tags env=dev`. In Dgraph, set the `--trace jaeger`
option in the Dgraph QA cluster to the first collector and set this option in
the Dgraph development cluster to the second collector. You can run multiple
Jaeger collector components for the same single Jaeger backend. This is still a
single Jaeger installation but with different collectors customizing the tags
per environment.

Once you have this configured, you can filter by tags in the Jaeger UI. Filter
traces by tags matching `env=dev`:

![Jaeger UI](/images/jaeger-ui.png)

Every trace has your custom tags set under the “Process” section of each span:

![Jaeger Query](/images/jaeger-server-query.png)

Filter traces by tags matching `env=qa`:

![Jaeger JSON](/images/jaeger-json.png)

![Jaeger Query Result](/images/jaeger-server-query-2.png)

To learn more about Jaeger, see
[Jaeger's Deployment Guide](https://www.jaegertracing.io/docs/deployment/).
