---
title: Why Dgraph?
description:
  Developers at startups to Fortune 500 companies choose Dgraph for their most
  intensive graph features
mode: "wide"
"og:title": "Why Dgraph? - Dgraph"
---

Dgraph is designed for real-time workloads, horizontal scalability, and data
flexibility. Implemented as a distributed system, Dgraph processes queries in
parallel to deliver the fastest results, even for the most complex workloads.

### Fully open source with an enormous community

Dgraph is a thriving open source project with 20,000+ GitHub stars and over 200
contributors. This means rapid bug fixes, feature enhancements, and a wealth of
shared expertise. There’s no vendor lock-in and your development efforts are
fully portable.

### Seamless horizontal scaling

Dgraph's distributed architecture ensures that your database can scale with your
data and user needs. Your data is automatically rebalanced and highly available
across multiple RAFT groups, even during multi-node failures. Graph traversals
are parallelized to enable efficient query processing, delivering near-linear
scale-out performance with no single-leader architecture.

### AI-native primitives

Dgraph's [vector indexing](./dql/indexes#vector-indices), search, and storage
allow you to store multiple embeddings on any given node or relationship.
Uniquely able to store multiple vector embeddings, Dgraph allows you to compare
and combine embedding models to get the best results for your similarity search.
You can combine HNSW vector similarity, keyword-search, geospatial polygons and
graph traversals to power your multi-modal search. Dgraph’s multi-tenancy
capabilities enable your AI apps to have logically separated knowledge graphs.

### Battle-tested for your most critical projects

With thousands of deployments globally, Dgraph is behind some of the world's
most important applications. From building rocket ships, to self-driving cars,
to beloved personal computers, to producing clean energy— Dgraph is a trusted
part of their applications.
