---
title: Graph Data Models 101
description:
  Graphs provide an alternative to tabular data structures, allowing for a more
  natural way to store and retrieve data
"og:title": "Graph Data Models 101 - Dgraph"
---

import DgraphWIP from "/snippets/dgraph-wip.mdx"

<DgraphWIP />

When building an app, you might wonder which database is the best choice. A
traditional relational database that you can query using SQL is a familiar
choice, but does a relational database really provide a natural fit to your data
model, and the performance that you need if your app goes viral and needs to
scale up rapidly?

This tutorial takes a deeper look at data modeling using relational databases
compared to graph databases like Dgraph, to give you a better understanding of
the advantages of using a graph database to power your app. If you aren't
familiar with graph data models or graph databases, this tutorial was written
for you.

## Learning goals

In this tutorial, you'll learn about graphs, and how a graph database is
different from a database built on a relational data model. This tutorial
doesn't include any code or syntax, but rather a comparison of graphs and
relational data models. By the end of this tutorial, you should be able to
answer the following questions:

- What's a graph?
- How are graphs different from relational models?
- How's data modeled in a graph?
- How's data queried from a graph?

Along the way, you might find that a graph is the right fit for the data model
used by your app. Any data model that tracks lots of different relationships (or
_edges_) between various data types is a good candidate for a graph model.

Whether this is the first time you are learning about graphs or looking to
deepen your understanding of graphs with some concrete examples, this tutorial
should help you along your journey.

If you are already familiar with graphs, you can jump right into our coding
example for [React](/dgraph/guides/message-board-app/introduction).

## Graphs and natural data modeling

Graphs provide an alternative to tabular data structures, allowing for a more
natural way to store and retrieve data.

For example, you could imagine that we're modeling a conversation within a
family:

- A `father`, who starts a conversation about going to get ice cream.
- A `mother`, who comments that she would also like ice cream.
- A `child`, who likes the idea of the family going to get ice cream.

This conversation could easily occur in the context of a modern social media or
messaging app, so you can imagine the data model for such an app as follows:

![A graph diagram for a social media app's data model](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-3.png)

For the remainder of this guide, we use this as our example app: a basic social
media or messaging app, with a data model that includes `people`, `posts`,
`comments`, and `reactions`.

A graph data model is different from a relational model. A graph focuses on the
relationships between information, whereas a relational model focuses on storing
similar information in a list. The graph model received its name because it
resembles a graph when illustrated.

- Data objects are called _nodes_ and are illustrated with a circle.
- Properties of nodes are called _predicates_ and are illustrated as a panel on
  the node.
- Relationships between nodes are called _edges_ and are illustrated as
  connecting lines. Edges are named to describe the relationship between two
  nodes. A `reaction` is an example of an edge, in which a person reacts to a
  post.

Some illustrations omit the predicates panel and show only the nodes and edges.

Referring back to the example app, the `father`, `mother`, `child`, `post`, and
`comment` are nodes. The name of the people, the post's title, and text of the
comment are the predicates. The natural relationships between the authors of the
posts, authors of the comments, and the comments' topics are edges.

As you can see, a graph models data in a natural way that shows the
relationships (edges) between the entities (nodes) that contain predicates.

## Relational Data Modeling

This section considers the example social media app introduced in the previous
section and discusses how it could be modeled with a traditional relational data
model, such as those used by SQL databases.

With relational data models, you create lists of each type of data in tables,
and then add columns in those tables to track the attributes of that table's
data. Looking back on our data, we remember that there are three main types,
`People`, `Posts`, and `Comments`

![Three tables](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-4.png)

To define relationships between records in two tables, a relational data model
uses numeric identifiers called _foreign keys_, that take the form of table
columns. Foreign keys can only model one-to-many relationship types, such as the
following:

- The relationship from `Posts` to `People`, to track contributors (authors,
  editors, etc.) of a `Post`
- The relationship from `Comments` to `People`, to track the author of the
  comment
- The relationship from `Comments` to `Posts`, to track on which post comments
  were made
- The relationship between rows in the `Comments` table, to track comments made
  in reply to other comments (a self-reference relationship)

![Relationships between rows in tables](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-5.png)

The limitations of foreign keys become apparent when your app requires you to
model many-to-many relationships. In our example app, a person can like many
posts or comments, and posts and comments can be liked by many people. The only
way to model this relationship in a relational database is to create a new
table. This so-called _pivot table_ usually doesn't store any information
itself, it just stores links between two other tables.

In our example app, we decided to limit the number of tables by having a single
“Likes” table instead of having `people_like_posts` and `people_like_comments`
tables. None of these solutions is perfect, though, and there is a trade-off
between having a lower table count or having more empty fields in our tables
(also known as "sparse data").

![An illustration of sparse data when creating a Likes table](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-6.png)

Because foreign keys can't be added in reference to entities that don't exist,
adding new posts and authors requires additional work. To add a new post and a
new author at the same time (in the Posts and People tables), we must first add
a row to the `People` table and then retrieve their primary key and associate it
with the new row in the `Posts` table.

![Adding a post and an author at the same time](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-7.png)

By now, you might ask yourself: how does a relational model expand to handle new
data, new types of data, and new data relationships?

When new data is added to the model, the model changes to accept the data. The
simplest type of change is when you add a new row to a table. The new row adopts
all of the columns from the table. When you add a new property to a table, the
model changes and adds the new property as a column on every existing and future
row for the table. And when you add a new data type to the database, you create
a new table with its own pre-defined columns. This new data type might link to
existing tables or need more pivot tables for a new many-to-many relationship.
So, with each data type added to your relational data model, the need to add
foreign keys and pivot tables increases, making support for querying every
potential data relationship increasingly unwieldy.

![Expanding a relational data model means more pivot tables](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-8.png)

Properties are stored as new columns and relationships require new columns and
sometimes new pivot tables. Changing the schema in a relational model directly
effects the data that's held by the model, and can impact database query
performance.

## Graph Data Modeling

In this section we take our example social media app and see how it could be
modeled in a graph.

The concept of modeling data in a graph starts by placing dots, which represent
nodes. Nodes can have one or more predicates (properties). A `person` may have
predicates for their name, age, and gender. A `post` might have a predicate
value showing when it was posted, and a value containing the contents of the
post. A `comment` would most likely have a predicate containing the comment
string. However, any one node could have other predicates that aren't contained
on any other node. Each node represents an individual item, hence the singular
naming structure.

![Nodes used in the example social media app](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-9.png)

As graphs naturally resemble the data you are modeling, the individual nodes can
be moved around this conceptual space to clearly show the relationships between
these data nodes. Relationships are formed in graphs by creating an edge between
them. In our app, a post has an author, a post can have comments, a comment has
an author, and a comment can have a reply.

For sake of illustration we also show the family tree information. The `father`
and the `mother` are linked together with a `spouse` edge, and both parents are
related to the child along a `child` edge.

![Illustration of relationships as edges](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-10.png)

With a graph, you can also name the inverse relations. From here we can quickly
see the inverse relationships. A `Post` has an `Author` and a `Person` has
`Posts`. A `Post` has `Comments` and a `Comment` is on a `Post`. A `Comment` has
an `Author`, and a `Person` has `Comments`. A `Parent` has a `Child`, and a
`Child` has a `Parent`.

You create many-to-many relationships in the same way that you make one-to-many
relationships, with an edge between nodes.

Adding groups of related data occurs naturally within a graph. The data is sent
as a complete object instead of separate pieces of information that needs to be
connected afterwards. Adding a new person and a new post to our graph is a
one-step process. New data coming in doesn't have to be related to any existing
data. You can insert this whole data object with 3 people, a post, and a comment
all in one step.

When new data is added to the model, the model changes to accept the data. Every
change to a graph model is received naturally. When you add a new node with a
data type, you are simply creating a new dot in space and applying a type to it.
The new node doesn't include any predicates or relationships other than what you
define for it. When you want to add a new predicate onto an existing data type,
the model changes and adds the new property onto the items that you define.
Other items not specifically given the new property type aren't changed. When
you add a new data type to the database, a new node is created, ready to receive
new edges and predicates.

![Illustration of expanding a graph data model](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-11.png)

The key to remember when modeling a graph is to focus on the relationships
between nodes. In a graph you can change the model without affecting the
underlying data. Because the graph is stored as individual nodes, you can adjust
predicates of individual nodes, create edges between sets of nodes, and add new
node types without affecting any of the other nodes.

## Query Data in a Relational Model

Storing our data is great, but the best data model would be useless without the
ability to query the data our app requires. So, how does information get
retrieved in a relational model compared to a graph model?

In a relational model, tables are stored in files. To support the sample social
media app described in this tutorial, you would need four files: `People`,
`Posts`, `Comments`, and `Likes`.

![Visualization of four files](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-12.png)

When you request data from a file, one of two things happens: either a table
scan takes place or an index is invoked. To find this data, the whole file must
be read until the data is found or the end of the file is reached. In our
example app there is a post titled, “Ice Cream?”. If the title isn't indexed,
every post in the file would need to be read until the database finds the post
entitled, “Ice Cream?”. This method would be like reading the entire dictionary
to find the definition of a single word: very time-consuming. This process could
be optimized by creating an index on the post’s title column. Using an index
speeds up searches for data, but it can still be time-consuming.

### What's an index?

An index is an algorithm used to find the location of data. Instead of scanning
an entire file looking for a piece of data, an index is used to aggregate the
data into "chunks" and then create a decision tree pointing to the individual
chunks of data. Such a decision tree could look like the following:

![Image showing a tree to lookup the term graph from an index. The tree should be in a “graph” type format with circles instead of squares.](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-13.png)

Relational data models rely heavily on indexes to quickly find the requested
data. Because the data required to answer a single question usually lives in
multiple tables, you must use multiple indexes each time that related data is
joined together. And because you can't index every column, some types of queries
won't benefit from indexing.

### How data is joined in a relational model

In a relational model, the request's response must be returned as a single table
consisting of columns and rows. To form this single table response, data from
multiple tables must be joined together. In our app example, we found the post
entitled “Ice Cream?” and also found the comments, “Yes!”, “When?”, and “After
Lunch”. Each of these comments also has a corresponding author: `Mother`,
`Child`, and `Father`. Because there is only one post as the root of the join,
the post is duplicated to join to each comment.

![Joins in a relational model](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-15.png)

Flattening query results can lead to many duplicate rows. Consider the case
where you also want to query which people liked the comments on this example
post. This query requires mapping a many-to-many relationship, which invokes two
additional index searches to get the list of likes by `person`.

![Flattening in a relational model](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-16.png)

Joining all of this together would form a single table containing many
duplicates: duplicate `posts` and duplicate `comments`. Another side effect of
this response approach is that it's likely that empty data exists in the
response.

In the next section, you'll see that querying a graph data model avoids the
issues that you would face when querying a relational data model.

## Query Data in a Graph Model

As you'll see in this section, the data model we use determines the ease with
which we can query for different types of data. The more your app relies on
queries about the relationships between different types of data, the more you
benefit from querying data using a graph data model.

In a graph data model, each record (a `person`, `post` or `comment`) is stored
as a data _object_ (sometimes also called a _node_). In the example social media
app described in this tutorial, there are objects for individual people, posts,
and comments.

![Image of many objects of people, posts, and comments(not showing the relationships for clarity of the objects themselves)](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-18.png)

When data is requested from the graph, a root function determines which nodes
are selected for the starting points. This root function uses indexes to
determine which nodes match quickly. In our app example, we want to start with
the root being the post with the title “Ice Cream?”. This type of lookup evokes
an index on the post's title, much like indexes work in a relational model. The
indexes at the root of the graph use the full index tree to find the data.

Connecting edges together to form a connected graph is called _traversal_. After
arriving at our `post`, “Ice Cream?”, we traverse the graph to arrive at the
post's `comments`. To find the post's `author`, we traverse the next step to
arrive at the people who authored the comment. This process follows the natural
progression of related data, and graph data models allow us to query our data to
follow this progression efficiently.

What do we mean by efficiently? A graph data model lets you traverse from one
node to a distantly related node without the need for anything like pivot
tables. This means that queries based on edges can be updated easily, with no
need to change the schema to support new many-to-many relationships. And, with
no need to build tables specifically for query optimization, you can adjust your
schema quickly to accommodate new types of data without adversely impacting
existing queries.

![Image of post with connected comments and author](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-19.png)

A feature of a graph model is that related edges can be filtered anywhere within
the graph's traversing. When you want to know the most recent `comment` on your
post or the last `person` to like the comment, filters can be applied to the
edge.

![Image of filters along an edge](/images/dgraph/guides/data-model-101/evolution-21.png)

When filters get applied along an edge, only the nodes that match the edge are
filtered - not all of the nodes in the graph. Applying this logic reduces the
size of the graph and makes index trees smaller. The smaller an index tree is,
the faster that it can be resolved.

In a graph model, data is returned in an object-oriented format. Any related
data is joined to its parent within the object in a nested structure.

```json
{
  "title": "IceCream?",
  "comments": [
    {
      "title": "Yes!",
      "author": {
        "name": "Mother"
      }
    },
    {
      "title": "When?",
      "author": {
        "name": "Child"
      }
    },
    {
      "title": "After Lunch",
      "author": {
        "name": "Father"
      }
    }
  ]
}
```

This object-oriented structure allows data to be joined without duplication.

## Conclusion

Congratulations on finishing the Dgraph learn course **Graph Data Models 101**!

Now that you have an overview and understanding of

- what a graph is
- how a graph differs from a relational model
- how to model a graph
- and how to query a graph

you are ready to jump into using Dgraph, the only truly native distributed graph
database.
